.\" Manpage for debai
.\" Contact debai@example.com for errors or typos.
.TH DEBAI 1 "January 2026" "Debai 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
debai \- AI Agent Management System for GNU/Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B debai
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B debai
is a comprehensive application for generating and managing AI agents that automate system tasks like package updates, application configuration, and resource management.
.PP
Debai uses local AI models via Docker Model Runner and local agents via cagent. It provides both a command-line interface and a graphical user interface (GTK4/Adwaita).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output with debug information.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use specified configuration file instead of default.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "General Commands"
.TP
.B status
Show system and Debai status, including dependencies and Docker information.
.TP
.B init [\-\-full]
Initialize Debai environment. Use \-\-full to also pull recommended models.
.TP
.B monitor [\-i INTERVAL]
Monitor system resources in real-time. Default interval is 2 seconds.
.SS "Agent Commands"
.TP
.B agent list [\-s STATUS]
List all agents. Filter by status: running, stopped, or all.
.TP
.B agent create \-n NAME [\-t TYPE] [\-m MODEL] [\-\-template NAME]
Create a new agent. Available types: system, package, config, resource, security, backup, network, custom.
.TP
.B agent start AGENT_ID
Start an agent.
.TP
.B agent stop AGENT_ID
Stop an agent.
.TP
.B agent delete AGENT_ID [\-f]
Delete an agent. Use \-f to skip confirmation.
.TP
.B agent chat AGENT_ID
Start an interactive chat session with an agent.
.TP
.B agent templates
List available agent templates.
.SS "Model Commands"
.TP
.B model list
List available models.
.TP
.B model pull MODEL_ID
Pull a model from Docker Model Runner.
.TP
.B model remove MODEL_ID [\-f]
Remove a model. Use \-f to skip confirmation.
.TP
.B model recommended
Show recommended models for different use cases.
.SS "Task Commands"
.TP
.B task list [\-s STATUS]
List all tasks. Filter by status: pending, running, completed, failed, or all.
.TP
.B task create \-n NAME \-c COMMAND [\-p PRIORITY] [\-\-template NAME]
Create a new task.
.TP
.B task run TASK_ID
Run a task immediately.
.TP
.B task templates
List available task templates.
.SS "Generate Commands"
.TP
.B generate iso [\-o OUTPUT] [\-\-base DISTRO] [\-\-include\-agents]
Generate a bootable ISO image with Debai pre-installed.
.TP
.B generate qcow2 [\-o OUTPUT] [\-\-size SIZE] [\-\-base DISTRO]
Generate a QCOW2 disk image for QEMU/KVM.
.TP
.B generate compose [\-o OUTPUT] [\-\-include\-gui]
Generate a Docker Compose configuration.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Initialize Debai and pull a model:
.RS
.nf
$ debai init --full
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create an agent from template:
.RS
.nf
$ debai agent create --name "Updates" --template package_updater
.fi
.RE
.PP
Chat with an agent:
.RS
.nf
$ debai agent chat abc123
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate an ISO image:
.RS
.nf
$ debai generate iso --output debai.iso --include-agents
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/debai/config.yaml
System-wide configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.config/debai/
User configuration directory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/debai/
Data directory for agents, models, and tasks.
.TP
.I /var/log/debai/
Log files directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DEBAI_CONFIG_DIR
Override the configuration directory.
.TP
.B DEBAI_DATA_DIR
Override the data directory.
.TP
.B DEBAI_LOG_LEVEL
Set the logging level (debug, info, warning, error).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error.
.TP
.B 2
Command line syntax error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR debai-gui (1),
.BR docker (1),
.BR qemu-img (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/debai/debai/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Debai Team <debai@example.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025-2026 Debai Team.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
